

Mariama Bâ's *So Long a Letter*


> Mariama Bâ (April 17, 1929 – August 17, 1981) was a Senegalese author, 
> whose two French-language novels were both translated into more than a dozen languages. 
Her most celebrated work is *Une si longue lettre* , translated into English as *So Long a Letter*.


In Mariama Ba’s epistolary novel, the protagonist Rama, a Muslim woman, must undergo a required time of 
four months and ten days of seclusion after her husband’s death. She profits from this time to write a 
letter that is sort of a diary and also a way of purging herself. In this letter she reveals secrets
and unveils painful situations that women are forced to cope with silently. 

The letter is part of a healing process to confront herself, her choices, her sufferings with Modu, her husband. Rama writes,
“The walls that limit my horizon for four months and ten days do not bother me. I have enough memories in me to ruminate upon, and these are what 
I am afraid of, for they smack of bitterness (Ba 1980,9). 

Rama utilizes her letter as a moment of catharsis to expurgate her most private thoughts of her 
   bitter life with Modu, her husband, a man who seduced his daughter’s schoolmate with expensive presents, 
   and ended up choosing her, the young Binetou, to be his second wife. 
   
   Rama’s letter while addressed to her friend Aissatou is 
   also a letter to herself. It is thus an opportunity to try to understand her own choices. An Innes says "while Rama is writing to a dear friend,
   she is at the same time writing to the self she is struggling to become (Innes, 1991).”
   After Modu’s death, Rama is ready free herself from the husband, or to definitely extirpate him from her life.
   
   
   For the first time she has the courage to stand up against her husband. With her letter Rama joins a women’s collective which
   fights women’s oppression and exploitation. Bâ is not only conscious of the universality of women’s status of second class citizens; 
   she takes part of the struggle to empower women. As she argues, 
   
   > I am not indifferent to the irreversible currents of women’s liberation 
  > that are lashing the world. This commotion that is shaking up every aspect of our lives reveals and illustrates. My heart rejoices each
  > time a woman emerges from the shadows. I know that the field of our gains is unstable, the retention 
  > of conquests difficult: social constraints are ever-present and male egoism resists (Ba 1980,93). 



